we start in Qatar where us officials say
negotiations to bring an end to the war
in Gaza are off to a quote promising
start the talks come as the Hamas run
Health Ministry says the Palestinian
death toll from the conflict has
surpassed 40,000 Hamas which sparked the
war with its October 7th Terror attacks
on Israel is not taking part in the
talks Israel is feeling pressure at home
to reach a deal for the release of the
remaining hostages the us and its allies
hope atuse might also avert expected
Iranian Le reprisals for the recent
assassination of hamas's political
leader Ismael Han in
Teran let's take a closer look at these
negotiations with Middle East expert
Daniel G Daniel we've seen so many
rounds of negotiations since October but
very little movement since November when
that group of hostages was was released
and exchanged for a group of Palestinian
pris rers where do things stand right
now well over the last couple of months
things have become more and more
complicated and at the same time which
is probably a bit ironic uh the
Americans have become more and more
optimistic in their communication every
time a round of negotiation fails and
new one started so uh we have to look at
the at the US communication strategy in
order to understand what is really at
stake it is true the Americans are
trying to use these hostage negotiations
these Gaza negotiations to prevent a
regional War but they're also trying of
course by creating this like optimistic
scenarios uh White House spokesperson
John kiry just said I think today uh we
are just talking about the
implementation of the details which is
quite interesting you know it's not a
question if they agree or not it's just
about the details that means very far
from the truth yeah it probably is but
it creates pressure and then he said
something else which is very interesting
uh I believe and that's what the US said
in the last couple of weeks uh repeated
that Israel did not achieve the goal of
destroying and disabling let's say Hamas
uh as a military force in Gaza and so
the Americans said you will not achieve
this goal so be reasonable you know and
negotiate now John Kirby said Israel has
almost achieved everything it wanted in
order to just let's say give a face
saving exit for the netan government to
say you have won you have achieved what
you wanted now sign the deal and that is
interesting I think we have to really
read carefully it's all about the
margins of interpretation and that's
also what the Qatari partners are doing
uh the the Iranians are going to tell
the Israelis are trying to protect these
negotiations for three or four days so
basically we're going to attack so the
qataris have to say look they're not
protecting it we're really working on
the deal so you this is this is the role
of the negotiators and as gruesome as
the as the news are every day that we
here I think this is an a very
interesting time of international
conflict diplomacy all of that said what
does does off to a good start then
mean well in fact that uh you remember
last may we we we we talked about the
Biden plan when uh Biden said well this
is basically an Israeli proposal and we
uh think that the Israelis have already
agreed to that then netan said no no we
did not it's not our plan uh then there
were accusations that the Israelis had
tried to push in other demands for
example uh a continuous military
presence of Israel in two different
corridors in the Gaza strip uh the
Israelis denied that and they said like
well we we did not invent this we didn't
come up with this a new it was something
that was already suggested but maybe it
was not outlined in detail in the plan
so it's about the words but let's say a
good start is that negotiations are
still happening and that the parties
believe that a deal a binding deal is
necessary because of course you can tell
you can say that netan is not interested
in a deal that's he's been accused of
that many times that he just like wants
to project the situation on and on and
on until he achieves a military Victory
and stays in power of course on the
other side you have Hamas who were not
interested in an initial deal now
they're saying we're not going going
even to Doha because we remain committed
and faithful to the deal uh that was
suggested in may keep in mind the head
of Hamas the political head of Hamas was
assassinated by the Israelis in in tan
and the most radical and most
uncompromising person that Hamas ever
had Yahya sinir is now officially at the
helm and still Hamas says we remain
committed to the deal that we have
agreed to to in in in May the Iranians
have always said we will take revenge
for what happened in tan regardless of
any like you know political Arrangements
but now they're messaging at the same
time if the Americans achieve a
ceasefire in in Gaza then we will uh
probably postpone or even probably
cancel our revenge and that is very
interesting because the Iranians now for
the first time or a very rare moment are
giving the United States a constructive
diplomatic role in the region they call
the Americans the big devil but at the
same time they're giving them a
diplomatic role and that is good news I
think uh the problem is The Americans
really have to deliver because they have
created a lot of expectations if they
don't deliver now we will see a major
war in the Middle East in a few days so
there are so many sources of pressure at
this moment the threat of a major
regional War the the pressure inside
Israel to get the hostages released but
also the the number of victims that
keeps growing and growing in Gaza
civilians that are killed as part of
this military operation on both sides
how much longer can the Waring factions
withstand this kind of
pressure well we see that uh the netan
government can sustain the pressure for
a long time it was not intimidated it
was not even let's say impressed by
whatever criticism and let's be honest
uh the criticism was came from the
United States from every now and then
but in fact uh the United States just
signed a major released a major arms
deal Congress still has to approve but I
don't don't don't see any don't think
there's a problem there about 20 billion
mainly uh fighter jets delivered to
Israel so the Americans of course
verbally issued some you know critical
statements but at the same time always
made it pretty clear we're going to
support Israel if a major conflict with
Iran erupts now you see everyone has has
a lot to lose in this conflict um Israel
in particular the civilians the society
they are tired of this war and they just
cannot afford another War look at the
Palestinians there's no safety for the
Palestinians at all like they are not
even in the situation to decide about
their own future Hamas is to a certain
extent but certainly not the Palestinian
population that's why the International
Community needs to speak on their behalf
you talk about other conflicts other
players like Hezbollah and Lebanon or
Iran of course they want to take revenge
and of course they want to show that
they have a force of deterrence but at
the same time they have a lot to lose
Hezbollah is a is a Lebanese party it
has power it has money and it has a lot
to lose if you have power and money you
have to stuff to lose so you you you are
careful about risking it and the same is
true for the Iranian regime that has
other geopolitical interests that go
beyond uh the the Israeli Palestinian
conflict and that's we have to see the
the interest of the players and we have
to take them seriously and then I think
that's what the duty of diplomacy is
I'll have to let you go yes or no answer
will we have a deal at the end of these
discussions I think we will but I don't
know how long these discussions take and
that's the major issue issue how long
can you still convince the other side
that you are serious you want to have a
deal but you still need time that's the
most difficult part for the negotiators
cautiously optimistic Daniel G Middle
East analyst thank you so
much negotiators are using a plan
drafted by the US and endorsed by the UN
Security Council it calls for a six-
week ceasefire in Gaza Hamas would
release its remaining Israeli hostages
in exchange for Palestinian prisoners
Israel would allow unlimited Aid
deliveries into Gaza and withdraw its
forces but Hamas which is considered a
terrorist organization by many countries
is not participating in the talks the
region is on edge as Israel awaits
retaliation from Iran after the killing
of hamas's political leader isma Han in
Teran last
month journalist Kareem elari is
following the story from Cairo for us
Kareem what are you hearing about the
status of the ceasefire negotiations at
the
moment well the negotiations are
starting now basically in Doha um there
was a momentum built up for this
negotiations of course which has to do
with the regional tension that was
building up with the killing of the
ptical Hamas leader isma hania and the
military commander fuad shuker of hisbah
in Lebanon so that of course created a
lot of pressure because the everyone was
waiting for the retaliation from Iran
from hisa possibly also from theis so
the conflict got took much wider circles
and that kind of pressured the US and
the Egyptian and the K negotiators to
ask for this uh new round of
negotiations as you said hisbah Hamas is
not taking part in this negotiations
they saying um they are afraid that
Israel is going to impose new conditions
as it happened many times before and
they call it an Israeli created Maze of
negotiations they want that this
negotiations are based on the Biden plan
something that is already discussed
since months and days when this uh base
is really the base of this negotiations
they might also attend at a later Point
don't forget there is a Hamas
representation a Hamas office in duha
that could join the negotiations anytime
yeah they're not present at the talks
but as far as I understand the situation
they're right up the street from where
those talks are happening How likely is
that absence of Hamas Representatives at
the table though to impact the success
of these
negotiations well you see the outline of
the negotiations is are clear since
months there's really nothing new to
negotiate there is no new will uh to
really invent we have since months like
uh a three phase deal on the table in
the first first phase release of some of
the hostages at some of the Palestinian
uh prisoners in Israeli uh prisons uh in
exchange for six weeks uh um ceasefire
followed by a second phase with more
releases uh and uh basically the idea
that the Israeli Army that a permanent
end of the war permanent ceas fire and
then a third phase which is about uh
rebuilding the Gaza Strip where you have
to have all kinds of of course setups
who is going to control the Gaza Strip
in case the Israeli Army is
withdra that was journalist Karim elari
in Ciro thank you so
much you're
welcome we can now speak to a
professional negotiator who has worked
for various Israeli governments and
prime ministers in the past Mo Crystal
heads up a consultant consultancy Nest
negotiation
strategy he joins us from Tel Aviv M we
mentioned that all Israelis are
expecting a retaliatory strike from Iran
and or Hezbollah after two killings
blamed on Israel can these negotiations
in K Qatar make any gains under this
Shadow or in fact head off a
retaliation well I think that it was uh
Iran which explicitly mentioned that if
a ceasefire agreement will be reached in
DOA uh Iran will reconsider its uh
retaliatory attack um you know we need
to take things uh by its merits uh Iran
andah threaten to uh make any attack on
Israel in the last two weeks this uh
didn't happen or hasn't been happening
yet and uh of course Iran is trying to
take advantage of the overall dynamic in
DOA Iran is trying to take advantage of
the tremendous pressure which is put by
the Biden Administration on Nan to reach
a SE fire and to see to what extent they
can gain why because Iran
itself uh was uh extremely embarrassed
by the uh assassination on its territory
and at the same time they need to react
retaliate in a way which will not lead
to a tremendous escalation which is
neither the interest of Iran and Russia
nor the interest of Israel and and the
US so that's a um a very dangerous and
sensitive game which is happening today
uh in Doha and in in the Middle East in
general now the Hamas is not sitting at
the table in in Doha uh but even without
Hamas many see this as a last chance for
negotiators how do you see it
well you know been taking part of so
many rounds of negotiation hostage and
political negotiations there is one
thing that I can tell you with
significant confidence there is never
last round Never Last Chance and never
the last uh um Summit there's always a
followup there always the right moment
and definitely in the Israeli Hamas uh
mind battle on these negotiations the
fact that sinir is not sitting at the
table and the fact that suir was
actually left almost alone in the Hamas
leadership with the assassination of
death and the hania that really diminish
the actual likelihood that this round
the specific rounds today and tomorrow
uh will end up with with a a deal
despite the efforts of the US Qatar and
and Egypt it just doesn't work like that
uh in in the Middle East understand you
have been involved in hostage release
negotiations in the past what's it like
to try to work with the hostage takers
to let let them
go well the uh it's always a challenging
uh task but this particular the number
of the
hostages which is in the hand of Hamas
our understanding that sinir see these
hostages as a policy as an insurance
policy for his uh life for the
continuing uh ruling of Hamas in Gaza
and the continue role of Hamas in the
Palestinian Arena from a professional
point of view and I know that I'm here
against the very dominant Israeli
sentiment from a professional point of
view a deal which all the uh hostages
will be released is almost impossible
because sinir will always
keep either live
hostages my assumption or even bodies
which uh is which he knows that Israel
care much about them in order to prolong
this and in order to make sure that his
life are not uh in in in danger so you
are relatively confident that not all
hostages will be
released well I to be honest I don't see
any scenario in which sinir will agree
to release all the hostages uh the
demands will increase uh what the the
basic principle in hostage negotiation
ation is you free and you take whoever
you can so if there is a deal at the
moment a sensation of violence for a
certain period of time for a release of
whoever was Left Alive by the hand of uh
this Terror organization myself as a
negotiator as a hostage negotiator I
will take it because my Supreme command
is to uh free as many people as possible
the continuation and the violence and
the isra Palestinian conflict will not
end this weekend in Doha and uh we still
have a long way to go including
unfortunately uh staying of hostages in
the hand of this uh uh ter organization
the only way uh to to resolve this is to
completely diminish or destroy uh
terminate Hamas ruling capacities and
regime in Gaza and a long process of
transformation
of the Palestinian
population MTI Crystal there a former
Israeli crisis negotiator thank you very
much for sharing your expertise and
experiences with
us thank you good evening